Welcome to the second episode of the Software Freedom Podcast.
This podcast is presented to you by the Free Software Foundation Europe.
We are a charity that empowers users to control technology.
I am Matthias Kirschner, I am the President of the Free Software Foundation Europe and
also from our side today with me is Bonnie Merring, our current intern.
Hello, our guest for today is Lydia Fincher.
She is the Vice President of KDE and she has been with KDE since 2006 and on the board
of KDE we since 2011.
Well, while we were preparing the podcast I looked up what KDE is actually doing and it's
developing a lot of free software.
It's an international community and it maintains a lot of free software projects.
The FSV has very close relationships with KDE for a long time.
We work together on several topics and exchange knowledge about for example running a German
EV although you have European or international activities and also for example how to manage
copyright in such a huge project.
So welcome.
Thank you for being with us Lydia.
Thank you so much for inviting me.
Could you briefly introduce KDE to us and what are you doing there?
How is it working?
Sure.
So KDE is a free software community that started out working on a desktop.
In 1996 Matthias Etrich started out this project with the aim to build a user-friendly desktop
that his partner could use for day-to-day work like writing some texts, listening to some
music and similar things.
Since then a lot has happened among them that we have a very good desktop that anyone
can use for day-to-day work but also a ton of applications around it that anyone can
use to do their day-to-day work on a computer.
We have music players, we have a natural painting program, we have educational software,
we have a web browser and so much more.
How did you yourself get involved in KDE?
So I got involved when I studied computer science and while I studied computer science I was
using Windows and at some point I noticed like this isn't right, there has to be something
better, there has to be something more where I have much more power over the software
I am using than I had before.
So I was looking around and talking to other people, I was studying with and clearly
at that time Ubuntu was the hot new thing so I tried out Ubuntu but I didn't quite warm
up to it, it wasn't quite right for me and I dug around a bit more and stumbled up on
Kubuntu which had KDE software on it and I was blown away because it had exactly everything
I needed and specifically all of its programs beautifully worked together.
So it had a my own program that had an address book and that address book was connected
to my IRC client, to my instant messaging client and everything really beautifully worked
together and I have not looked back since.
But as far as I understand KDE is not your daily job, you work there as a volunteer,
how do you manage to do both, like a daily job and working as a volunteer?
So my day job is working as the product manager for Wikidata which is a system project
of Wikipedia to build a knowledge base with general purpose data about the world and that
is really cool because it allows me quite some flexibility to manage my own schedule
in a way that allows for a lot of the things that KDE requires from me and then there's
a lot of good time management and I kind of learned to do this that are meticulously used.
So on the question of like volunteering in such a large project, I once said a conversation
with someone from a company and that was very interesting because it's always this
strange decision for me if I should hire more people out of the KDE community because
I mean they know the technology I need in my company but if I hire them, then usually
because they work during all the day with this technology already, they are not so motivated
to continue with working with those technologies in their free time.
So when I hire more people from the KDE community, I will see less activity in the KDE community.
So is it a problem for KDE if those technology which you also use like CUED, if they are
commercially very successful?
I don't see it as a zero sum game where quite the opposite.
In the past it has been a problem for us but in recent years we've really turned things
around there in that there are more companies who employ people not just because they know
KDE but also to work on KDE itself.
So more of that time is freed up to actually work on KDE as if they were just doing it
in their free time but I think the even more important part of that is that people are
empowered to make a living on free software and the more this becomes an option, the
better it is for all of free software.
Okay, if there are so many volunteers now professionally earning their money with free software,
how many of these volunteers do you have and how many of them are working like earning
their money with free software?
So I mean there's thousands of people contributing to KDE every month, it's very hard to have
numbers on that of course because it's a huge project where people contribute in very
different ways.
So some rate code, some do more project management type of tasks, others help on a report
to test something, the next person writes some documentation and so on so it's very hard
to really have a number on that but in the thousands.
Of those, how many make a living on with free software, again hard to tell because we
don't ask people usually these types of questions but especially in the KDE core community
I would say it's quite a few.
And do you have to feeling that it increased over time?
Yes, it definitely increased over time and in part because we spend a lot of time building
out relationships to the companies around us and empowering people to start companies around
KDE to provide customizations on top of KDE to provide additional software development
and similar things.
Is it still increasing?
I would say it's still increasing in general, we've had a bump in contributions a few
years ago and that came from people kind of losing their way, KDE started out as trying
to build an end user desktop.
And at some point we had achieved that but also not and the world around us was moving
on right and individual people in KDE didn't concentrate so much on KDE as a whole anymore
but on their individual application for example and we were lacking cohesion across all of
KDE to really figure out what are we as KDE doing, why are we even here together and when
we realized that we said okay we need to change this because this is not good for community
and we started a process to define what we want to work on together.
And out of that came three goals that we worked on over the past few years and now we elected
new goals at the last academy or annual conference and that has really helped get new people
who are interested in these goals that we set but also re-energized the people that we had
and who are kind of disillusioned to kind of give them a new focus and yes they're still really
exciting stuff that you can do here and it's really important that we do it.
Okay, let me come back to the girls in a second, first person I want to ask you about the shift
of generation you already mentioned so how do you deal with a shift like that because you have
all the old school programmers back there and now you have these young GitHub generation.
Hmm, how do you deal with that in such a huge project?
I think KDE is one of the big projects that manage to become multi-generational and in part
this has been because we've always put a huge focus on mentoring and raising
so to say the next generation we take part in programs like Google Summer of Code but also have
our own mentoring program and there's a lot of informal mentoring going on that really brings
along the next generation and teaches them how we work and why we do certain things but also
empowers them to question a few things and do things differently and what are your goals for the
next two years? So the ones we have elected are consistency all about the apps and Wayland.
Now I need to explain a bit more about what that means. So let's start with Wayland. KDE's software
for quite some time has been trying to get to the point where it works very well on Wayland,
the new window-managing protocol. So for our listeners before it was the XWindow
system and now there is this huge shift with lots of distributions to switch to Wayland.
Yes, which brings a lot of benefits with it among the more security and so on but it is a huge
amount of work that needs to be done to adapt both Plasma, our desktop but also all our applications
to iron out little bucks and make them work with support for example for things like tablets
so our natural painting application Cretac can work nicely and you can paint beautiful pictures.
This transition takes a lot of work and just needs more focus so that we can make this transition happen.
That is what Wayland as a goal is about. Then we have all about the apps which is focusing on
the idea that KDE over the last years has been focusing very much on promoting our desktop and has
been collecting the promotion of our applications a bit and we want to change that by bringing them
into app stores and so on so that people can easily get to them and enjoy our applications no
matter which operating system they use or how they get their applications and the third one
consistency as in any big project that has been growing for a very long time there's a lot of
inconsistencies that creep in different applications implementing the same thing in slightly
different ways or just things that don't make sense if you take a step back and the consistency
goal is trying to identify those and make things more consistent so that you can enjoy using our
applications. So when you talk about that before you concentrated a lot on a desktop I would switch
the focus a little bit to the mobile area and I mean there were recent developments with
Huawei and a lot of people saw that they were not able or had problems with continuing to ship
their phones with Android because of restriction by the US government so more and more people think
about the centralization of operating systems on the mobile devices and the services which are
provided there so I wonder how do you see the role of KDE and KDE plasma in relationship to the
Android and mobile phone area. So on the one hand the mobile phone applications that we have
and every provide for example some educational programs we do want them to work on Android right
because a huge amount of people out there are using Android phones and they should be able to
use our software because the first step getting away from a closed platform is using some open
programs and applications on it so the switch later to a completely free system isn't as big
and as frightening. So we do want people to use our applications on Android and we make them
available. Where do you make them available on an f-troid then or on the play store and on f-troid
yeah so that's the integrating and the existing system piece and the other side is plasma mobile
as a system that nicely integrates with our desktop. People will continue to use desktops and
laptops for a lot of work they do right writing your master's thesis on a mobile phone or tablet
is going to be very very painful for example doing all that research and so on. So what we are
trying to enable is you do your work on your laptop or your desktop and seamlessly it integrates
with your phone so that you can continue working there whatever you were doing watching a movie or
and so on and plasma mobile is part of that story but it is of course also part of
the story of a completely open mobile stack and that is not something KDE can do on its own it needs
a lot of support from different players around us because we have a certain area of expertise
that is desktop and apps for end users and we need to work together with other people for example
on opening up hardware and benefiting from that because no one can do that alone. So if we stay
with that topic which KDE plasma if if Huawei says well we would like to use that on our mobile
phones would it be ready for that or what would be needed there? I think there would be still
be quite a lot of work to be done simply because the number of people working on plasma mobile is
so much smaller than the number of people working on for example Android but that doesn't mean
it wouldn't be possible and I think with Qt and the existing KDE applications we actually have a
very good ground to work from and a head start so to say seems to be a good alternative
then for Android in a few years? Hopefully and I would love it if more people join us in making
that happen. You hear this guys? Okay I have a different topic yes and I want to ask here about
sustainability because I am really into this topic. I was wondering it's such a huge topic in
the conversation okay after society. How is KDE dealing with this is this any topic in the
community? Like especially digital sustainability? Right so it is definitely a topic and as you
can imagine in a community as large and diverse as KDE that is not an easy discussion because
there are so many different opinions and so many different details that people care about
because people care so we've been having discussions like should we take part in the global
climate strike and similar things? And it started kind of from the question around okay what
can KDEV the support organization do and what should it do when for example it is sending people
to sprints from far places or when it's organizing the annual conference academy? How can we make
that more sustainable? There's still a lot to be discussed but it's making progress and I think we
end up with a policy and that gives us some guidance on that on what the KDE community
thinks and I hope we have that in the next year. So then I would go into one other topic I mentioned
in the introduction already that KDE is the biggest organization, volunteer organization out there
which is using the FSFE's fiduciary license agreement so that agreement was created to concentrate
decision power within one entity in this case KDEV to prevent the fragmentation of rights on one
hand while on the other side preventing single entity like KDEV then from abusing its power to
just realize all the code into like a proprietary software license. So what is your experience with that?
The FRA is very important for us I don't believe we put enough thought into it how important it is
unfortunately as a community because there are very few cases you become aware of when it really
matters until it's too late. One example very recently someone was trying to realize
a part of one of our applications code so they could reuse it in other places and they were just
liking the okay from one individual contributor. Now that was the main contributor to that code.
It turns out after a lot of research and trying to contact that person that they have been
in an accident a long time ago and have stopped contributing to KDE because of what happened in
that accident and now in this particular case we got lucky and we got the okay to realize
on that code but what would have happened right you never know and unfortunately you
realize how much you need that when it's too late and I think we should be paying a lot more
attention to that and getting a lot more people to sign the FRA but that takes work.
That was a hard topic you weren't thinking about accidents and what else could happen but
yeah as you said it's important to think about the other things because we don't want to be in a
situation that a lot of code has to be rewritten because we haven't thought about it beforehand.
Especially in communities where there's usually central figures who contribute a lot of the
code. So also one of the more long-term topics I mean we talked before about KDE's focus on the
desktop now shifting the focus on apps and also on the mobile sphere. Now looking further some years
we might not even have a mobile phone anymore but there are lots of lots of devices around us
which are all connected and you might interact with your computer in different ways than we are used
so how do you see KDE's role if that would happen or if that happens. That is part of what we prepared
for all right we started out so focused on the desktop and we realized that that is becoming
less and less relevant while still being important but it can't be the only thing that keeps us
alive as a community. We are there because we want to give people freedom and empowerment over
their digital lives wherever their digital life is whatever that means that is where we have to be
and if it means all kinds of internet of things devices in the next years then we will have to
look at that as well. Are you looking at it already or do you until now ignore the internet of
things. It's definitely not our focus at the moment. Now when we are looking for next year on
the 14th of February the FSFE always celebrates the I love free software day or we remind people about
the I love free software day because we want thought that in the free software community we are
sometimes a bit harsh with each other. I mean you might have experience with that in the KDE
community as well that there are people who criticize each other they make bug reports and tell
others of their software doesn't work and tell them what to do better and in all of that the
discussion can sometimes get a bit heated and we thought it's good to run people once a year at
least to say thank you so we will have that again on the 14th of February. Now my question would be
when you now already have to decide about who would you thank there and I make it a bit easier
for you because I don't want to bring in the position that afterwards people in your community will
say well she thanked this project of KDE and not the other one so which project outside of KDE would
you thank there. Very good question. I think the I love free software day is a great opportunity
because we thank each other way too little. KDE is a very great community and we are very friendly
and and they thank you to each other but there can always be more and there can definitely always
be more in free software as a whole. So yes we should do that more often. Now in particular which
free software project would I sense of love that would be signal for allowing me to privately
and securely communicate with all the people I care about. Lydia thank you very much for being
with us. It was a great pleasure to have you here again and yes all the best. Thank you so much
and thank you to you and the FSVE for keeping free software available and amazing for all of us
here. I also say thank you and now I know a lot more about KDE. Thank you bye bye.
This was the second episode of the Self Refreedom Podcast. If you liked this episode please
recommend it to your friends and subscribe to make sure you also get the next episode. Please
also don't forget if you have the chance to rate this podcast. This podcast is presented to you by
the free software foundation Europe. We are a charity that works on promoting software freedom.
If you like our work please consider supporting us with a donation. You find more information
under my.fsfe.org slash donate. Thank you very much and looking forward to next time. See you.